		      CSE535: Asynchronous Systems            2014-11-14
		   Scott Stoller, Stony Brook University

		      Project: Chain Replication

============================================================
OVERVIEW

Implement chain replication, as described in

  [vRS2004chain] Robbert van Renesse and Fred B. Schneider.  Chain
  Replication for Supporting High Throughput and Availability.  In
  Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
  Implementation (OSDI), pages 91-104.  USENIX Association, 2004.
  http://www.cs.cornell.edu/fbs/publications/ChainReplicOSDI.pdf

Also, design and implement an extension to handle an operation that
involves multiple chains, as described below.

Chain replication is also described in

  [vrG2010replication] Robbert van Renesse and Rachid Guerraoui.
  Replication Techniques for Availability. In Replication: Theory and
  Practise, Bernadette Charron-Bost, Fernando Pedone, and Andre Schiper,
  editors, volume 5959 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 19-40.
  Springer-Verlag, 2010.
  http://www.cs.cornell.edu/Courses/cs5414/2012fa/publications/vRG10.pdf

The algorithm is fundamentally the same in both papers, but some details
differ.  The first paper is more detailed in some respects, so it will be
our primary reference, but the second paper is also worth reading.

{UPDATE 2014-09-26]
Your implementation must allow each server to run on a different machine.

{UPDATE 2014-09-29]
All communication must be explicit using some form of messages.  Use of
shared files or distributed shared memory is not permitted.

[UPDATE 2014-10-10] as mentioned in the last paragraph of section 3.0 of
the paper, the implementation should forward "state changes" along the
chain, not forward the state.  in our project, an update message should
specify how an account object should be updated.  an update message should
not contain the entire state of the affected account (e.g., it should not
contain the entire history of processed transactions for the affected
account).

To simplify the correctness proof, the papers describe the protocol as
storing a complete history (sequence of updates) for each object.  As the
papers point out, an actual implementation (like yours!) should store the
current state of each object instead.

This project is inspired in part by the project for Fred Schneider's Fall
2012 CS5414 Distributed Computing Principles, available at
http://www.cs.cornell.edu/Courses/cs5414/2012fa/

============================================================
FUNCTIONALITY OF THE REPLICATED SERVICE

the replicated service stores bank account information.  it stores the
following information for each account: (1) balance, (2) sequence of
processed updates, denoted processedTrans.

the service supports the following query and update requests.  the reply to
each request is an instance of the class Reply, shown below as a tuple for
brevity.

enum Outcome { Processed, InconsistentWithHistory, InsufficientFunds }

class Reply {
  string reqID;
  string accountNum;
  Outcome outcome;
  float balance;
}

note: making request identifiers strings (rather than numbers) allows them
to have structure, e.g., "1.1.1".  this makes it easier to generate unique
request identifiers, using a structure such as
bankName.clientNumber.sequenceNumber.

QUERIES

  getBalance(reqID, accountNum): returns <reqID, Processed, balance>.

UPDATES

  [UPDATE 2014-10-04: in each of the following 3 paragraphs, I replaced "if
  exactly the same transaction has already been processed for this account,
  simply return <reqID, Processed, balance>." with "if exactly the same
  transaction has already been processed, re-send the same reply."]

  [UPDATE 2014-10-10: in each of the following 3 paragraphs, I added
  accountNum as the second component of the reply.]

  deposit(reqID, accountNum, amount): if a transaction with this reqID has
  not been processed for this account, increase the account balance by the
  amount, append the transaction to processedTrans, and return <reqID,
  accountNum, Processed, balance>, where balance is the current balance.
  if exactly the same transaction has already been processed, re-send the
  same reply.  if a different transaction with the same reqID has been
  processed for this account, return <reqID, accountNum,
  InconsistentWithHistory, balance>.

  withdraw(reqId, accountNum, amount): if a transaction with this reqID has
  not been processed for this account, and the account balance is at least
  the amount, decrease the account balance by the amount, append the
  transaction to processedTrans, and return <reqID, accountNum, Processed,
  balance>.  if a transaction with this reqID has not been processed for
  this account, and the account balance is less than the amount, return
  <reqID, accountNum, InsufficientFunds, balance>.  if exactly the same
  transaction has already been processed, re-send the same reply.  if a
  different transaction with the same reqID has been processed for this
  account, return <reqID, accountNum, InconsistentWithHistory, balance>.
  [UPDATE 2014-10-11: added "for this account" in the preceding sentence.]

  transfer(reqID, accountNum, amount, destBank, destAccount): if a
  transaction with this reqID has not been processed for this account, and
  the account balance is at least the transfer amount, then transfer the
  requested amount of funds from the specified account in this bank to
  destAccount in destBank, and return <reqID, accountNum, Processed,
  balance>.  if a transfer with this reqID has not been processed for this
  account, and the account balance is less than the transfer amount, return
  <reqID, accountNum, InsufficientFunds, balance>.  if exactly the same
  transaction has already been processed, re-send the same reply.  if a
  different transaction with the same reqID has been processed for this
  account, return <reqID, accountNum, InconsistentWithHistory, balance>.
  [UPDATE 2014-10-11: added "for this account" in the preceding sentence
  and in the first and second sentences of this paragraph.]  [UPDATE,
  2014-09-17: added the following] It is acceptable for a server of either
  the source bank or the destination bank to send a reply to the client.
  However, the client should send the request only to a server of the
  source bank; the client should not need to send a request to a server of
  the destination bank.

  [UPDATE 2014-11-14] for simplicity, you can assume that all transfers are
  between two different banks.

============================================================
SIMPLIFICATIONS

if an account mentioned in a request does not already exist, then it is
automatically created, with initial balance 0, and then the request is
processed as described above.

assume clients never send requests with non-positive amounts.

assume the master never fails.  therefore, you do not need to implement
Paxos.

the same master is used by all banks.  the master reports every failure to
all servers of all banks.  [UPDATE, 2014-09-18: the master also reports
failures to clients.]

assume that the pattern of failures is limited so that there is always at
least one living server for each bank.

it is sufficient to store all information in RAM.  it's OK that information
stored by a process is lost when the process fails or terminates.

it is sufficient to test your system with all of the clients being threads
in a single process.  you should run testcases with up to 3 banks and up to
6 clients per bank.

============================================================
NETWORK PROTOCOLS

as stated in the paper, communication between servers should be reliable,
so use TCP as the underlying network protocol for it, and assume that TCP
is reliable.  this applies to communication between servers in the same or
different chains.  also, communication between the master and servers is
reliable, so use TCP for it.

communication between clients and servers may be unreliable, so use UDP as
the underlying network protocol for it.  for simplicity, assume that each
request or reply fits in a single UDP packet.

[UPDATE 2014-11-04] the paper does not state whether communication between
clients and the master is reliable.  for simplicity, I suggest that you
assume it is reliable, and use TCP for it.


============================================================ 
CONFIGURATION FILE

all clients, servers, and the master read information from a configuration
file whose name is specified on the command line.  for simplicity, all
three kinds of processes read the same configuration file, and each kind of
process ignores the information it does not need.  note: this implies that
configuration file contains information for all banks.

the configuration file contains enough information to specify a testcase;
thus, you can run different testcases simply by supplying different
configuration files.  information in the configuration file includes (but
is not limited to): the names of the banks, the length of the chain for
each bank, Internet addresses and port numbers of the master and servers
(for all banks), the number of clients of each bank, a description of the
requests submitted by each client (explained below), server
startup delays, and server lifetimes (explained below).

[UPDATE 2014-10-07] The DistAlgo implementation should ignore the IP
addresses and port numbers in the configuration file.

the configuration file should have a self-describing syntax.  instead of
each line containing only a value, whose meaning depends on the line number
(where it is hard for readers to remember which line number contains which
value), each line should contain a label and a value, so the reader easily
sees the meaning of each value.

[UPDATE 2014-10-12] different requests can be specified for each client.

the description of a client's requests in the configuration file can have
one of two forms: (1) a single item random(seed, numReq, probGetBalance,
probDeposit, probWithdraw, probTransfer), where seed is a seed for a
pseudo-random number generator, numReq is the number of requests that will
be issued by this client, and the remaining parameters (which should sum to
1) are the probabilities of generating the various types of requests.  (2)
a sequence of items, each representing one request using some readable and
easy-to-parse syntax, such as "(getBalance, 1.1.1, 46)".  the configuration
file should also contain separate entries controlling the following: the
duration a client waits for a reply, before either resending the request or
giving up on it; the number of times a client re-sends a request before
giving up on it; whether the client re-sends a request to the new head for
a bank, if the client, while waiting for a reply from that bank, is
notified by the master of failure of the head for the bank.

the configuration file specifies a startup delay (in milliseconds) for
each server.  a server's main thread does essentially nothing except sleep
until the server's startup delay has elapsed.  this feature facilitates
testing of the algorithm for incorporating new servers (i.e., extending the
chain).  servers that are part of the initial chain have a startup delay of
zero.

the configuration file specifies a lifetime for each server, which may be
(1) "receive" and a number n (the server terminates immediately after
receiving its n'th message), (2) "send" and a number n (the server
terminates immediately after sending its n'th message), or (3) "unbounded"
(the server never terminates itself).  furthermore, the number n in (1) and
(2) can be replaced with the string "random", in which case the server
generates a random number in a reasonable range, outputs it to a log file,
and uses that number.

[UPDATE 2014-11-02] You are welcome to implement additional forms of server
lifetime, if it helps you construct desired failure scenarios.

configuration files that satisfy some variant of the above requirements are
also acceptable, provided they provide a comparable level of control, as
needed for thorough testing of fault-tolerant distributed systems.

tip: you will have numerous configuration files.  to help keep track of them,
organize them into folders, and try to give them meaningful names.

[UPDATE 2014-10-03: added the following.]  for non-fault-tolerant service
(phase2), you do not need to consider scenarios with message loss between
clients and servers.  for subsequent phases, you do need to consider such
scenarios, because such with message loss is one of the types of failures
that chain replication is designed to tolerate.  you will need to introduce
such failures synthetically (i.e., simulate them), in a similar way as
server lifetimes (specified in the configuration file) are used to simulate
server failures.  you should introduce some lines in the configuration file
to specify when and how often message loss between clients and servers
occurs.

============================================================
LOGS

every process should generate a comprehensive log file describing its
initial settings, the content of every message it received, the content of
every message it sent, and every significant internal action it took.
every log entry should contain a real-time timestamp.  every log entry for
a sent message should contain a send sequence number n, indicating that it
is for the n'th message sent by this process.  every log entry for a received
message should contain a receive sequence number n, indicating that it is
for the n'th message received by this process.  (send and receive sequence
numbers are useful for choosing server lifetimes that correspond to
interesting failure scenarios.)  the log file should have a self-describing
syntax, in the same style as described for the configuration file.  for
example, each component of a message should be labeled to indicate its
meaning.

[UPDATE 2014-10-12] it's OK for multiple processes to write to the same log
file, provided each log entry is clearly labeled with the process that
produced it.

============================================================
FAILURE DETECTION

chain replication is designed to work correctly under the fail-stop model,
which assumes perfect failure detection (cf. [vRG2010replication, section
2.4]).  there are two completely different approaches to handling this.

one approach, suitable during development and testing, is to "fake" failure
detection.  specifically, when a server is preparing to terminate as
specified by its configuration, it sends a message announcing its
termination to the master.  with this approach, the master implements
failure detection simply by waiting for such notifications.  this
approach's advantage is guaranteed absence of false alarms.  this
approach's disadvantage is that unplanned failures (e.g., a process
terminating due to an uncaught exception) are not detected.

the other approach is to implement real failure detection, using timeouts.
for example, each server S sends a UDP packet containing S's name to the
master every 1 second.  every (say) 5 seconds, the master checks whether it
has received at least 1 message from each server that it believes is alive
during the past 5 seconds.  if not, it concludes that the uncommunicative
servers failed.  note that a few occasional dropped UDP packets should not
cause the master to conclude that a server has failed.  this approach never
misses real failures, but it can produce false alarms if enough packets are
dropped or delayed.

  aside: another approach is to keep a TCP connection open between the
  master and each server, and let exceptions raised by the TCP socket
  indicate server failure.  this approach is not recommended, because it is
  less transparent and less flexible.

you should adopt the second approach.  your testing scenarios will not
involve wide-area networks or high network congestion, so it should be easy
to find settings that avoid false alarms, and you will gain the experience
of implementing a failure detector.

[UPDATE 2014-10-26]
here are two ways to get a server process to periodically send heartbeat
messages to the master in DistAlgo.

1. create a separate thread to do this.  this is not especially difficult
in DistAlgo.  DistAlgo does not require any special treatment of threads.
use standard Python thread commands.

2. send the heartbeat messages in the main thread.  for example, the method
could look like this:

while True:
  if (await(False)): pass
  elif timeout(T): send heartbeat message

the process will block at the await statement, running receive handlers
when messages arrive, until time T has elapsed, at which time the process
will send a heartbeat message, and then loop back to the await statement.

similar code can be used in the master to periodically "wake up" and check
whether it has recently received enough heartbeat messages from each
server.

============================================================
PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES

Each team will implement most of the project (all except the last phase) in
two programming languages.  This will provide experience implementing
distributed systems in different languages and will provide insight into
the strengths and weaknesses of those languages by allowing direct
comparison of their use to implement the same algorithm.  One of the
languages must be DistAlgo, an extension of Python designed to make
distributed algorithms easier to write.  The other language can be any
programming language of your choice except Python (which overlaps too much
with DistAlgo).

[UPDATE 2014-09-29]
The DistAlgo distribution is available at 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/distalgo/files/

============================================================
PHASE 0: TEAM FORMATION

find exactly one teammate.  one member of each team should send a message
to stoller@cs.stonybrook.edu containing the names and email addresses of
both team members.  if you cannot find a teammate, don't panic!  just send
me a message stating this, and I will find a teammate for you.  every team
will have exactly two members.  the only exception to this policy will be:
if the number of students in the class is odd, I will choose one person
with no teammate and either add them to a team or ask them to work alone.

------------------------------------------------------------
PHASE 1: PSEUDO-CODE

1.  write complete pseudo-code for clients, servers, and the master that
supports all operations except transfer.  for clients, include only
pseudo-code for the protocol (e.g., keep track of which servers are
currently the head and tail), not pseudo-code for reading the configuration
file generating random requests, etc.  for servers, remember to maintain
the account information described above.  make threads, synchronization,
and communication explicit, keeping other aspects of the pseudo-code (e.g.,
data structures) at a high level of abstraction.  the pseudo-code should
include a reasonable amount of explanatory comments.  encapsulate the
details of the banking service operations in methods, so they do not
clutter the main part of the pseudo-code.

you may use the pseudo-code in [vRG2010replication] as a starting point if
desired.  keep in mind that it differs from what is required here in some
ways.  for example, it omits the algorithm for extending a chain, it omits
pseudo-code for failure detection, and it stores the entire history instead
of the current state, it sends the entire history instead of just the
necessary information in messages between servers and replies from servers
to clients, and it is not specialized to support the banking service.

the main purpose of pseudo-code is to demonstrate and convey understanding
of the algorithm.  clarity and readability are paramount.

2.  describe your design for extending the algorithm to handle transfers.
your design should satisfy the following requirement: if a transfer is
performed by (i.e., reflected in the account history at) any living server
of either bank involved in the transfer, then eventually all living servers
for both involved banks perform the transfer, regardless of whether the
client ever re-transmits the request.  informally, this prevents money from
disappearing (if only the source bank processed the transfer) or being
created (if only the destination bank processed the transfer).  note that
transfers performed by servers that crash do not necessarily get performed
by other servers; this is acceptable, because this algorithm does not use
persistent storage.  furthermore, the design should not use any explicit
timeouts.  note that this prohibits explicit periodic repetition of some
event until some other event occurs, because the periodic repetition is
driven by timeouts.  as in the core algorithm, any timing dependence should
be encapsulated in the assumption of perfect failure detection by the
master and the assumption of reliable communication between servers.
[UPDATE 2014-09-02: I rewrote this entire paragraph; re-read it carefully.]

give a convincing argument that your design is correct.  for examples of
such arguments, see the proof of correctness in [vRS2004chain] and in the
lecture notes on chain replication, and the "Why It Works" sections in
[vrG2010replication].

clarity and correctness are critical.  keep the design reasonably simple.
unnecessarily complicated designs will not receive full credit.  do not
complicate the design to achieve minor optimizations.  on the other hand,
the design should not contain inefficiencies that can be eliminated
without appreciably complicating the design.  if you are uncertain whether
you are striking the correct balance, you are welcome to ask the instructor
for guidance, preferably during office hours.

{UPDATE, 2014-09-18: Your design cannot change the functionality of the
master.  the master's only role is failure detection.]

3.  write complete pseudo-code for clients, servers, and the master that
supports all operations, including transfer.  of course, most of the
pseudo-code is copied from item 1.

[UPDATE: to save paper, the printout you submit does not need to include
item 1, since it is mostly a subset of item 3.]

------------------------------------------------------------ 
PHASE 2: NON-FAULT-TOLERANT SERVICE

in both languages, implement and test the clients and servers, except do
not implement algorithms to cope with failures, extend the chain, or
support transfers.  thus, clients issue requests, and servers handle them
appropriately (forwarding updates along the chain, etc.), provided no
failures occur.

------------------------------------------------------------ 
PHASE 3: FAULT-TOLERANT SERVICE

1.  in both languages, implement the master, extend the implementation with
algorithms to cope with failures and extend the chain, and test everything.

2.  write a comparison of your experience implementing the algorithm in the
two languages.  discuss and compare the size of the code in each language,
time and effort to write the initial version of the code, time and effort
to debug the initial version of the code, readability of the code,
similarity to the pseudo-code, and any other comments on the strengths and
weaknesses of the languages for various types of programming.  ideas for
language improvements are also welcome.

COMMENTS:

It is reasonable to assume that the entire Sent list can be sent at once.
however, during chain extension, you should not assume that the entire
current state can be sent at once. you should send it in pieces, e.g., one
account at a time (since the transaction history for an account could be
large).

To thoroughly test chain extension, you need to create testcases in which
the old tail processes some updates while sending the state to the new
tail.  this might not happen naturally, since the state of the service in
the testcases is small.  one way to overcome this is to insert an
artificial delay (controlled by options in the configuration file) in the
code for chain extension, causing the old tail to delay between sending the
data for each account.  generally, you are free to add delays wherever
necessary to facilitate testing.  all delays should be controlled through
the configuration file,

------------------------------------------------------------ 
PHASE 4: TRANSFERS

in one language of your choice, implement the extension to support
transfers.  if the design of the extension has changed after your phase 1
submission, update the description and pseudo-code from phase 1 to be
consistent with the implementation.

============================================================
SUBMISSION INSTRUCTIONS

PHASE 0: send the email by 11:59pm on the due date.

PHASE 1: submit a printout in class on the due date, and submit the
document in the Assignments area on Blackboard by 11:59pm on the due date.

REMAINING PHASES: submit a zip (or tar) file in the Assignments area in
Blackboard by 11:59pm on the due date.  the file should be named
lastname1-lastname2-phaseN.zip (or lastname1-lastname2-phaseN.tar.gz),
where lastname1 and lastname2 are the last names of the team members, and N
is the phase number; for example, kenobi-skywalker-phase1.zip.  

[UPDATE, 2014-09-19: please leave the Comment box blank when you submit the
assignment on Blackboard.  we look only at the uploaded files.]

the zip (or tar) file should have the following structure and contents:

  README.txt   see details below
  testing.txt  description of testcases (see below)
  config/      configuration files
  src/client/  source code for client
  src/server/  source code for server
  src/master/  source code for master
  src/common/  source code used for multiple kinds of processes
  logs/        log files from running testcases described in README.txt
  phase1/      current version of material from phase1

README.txt should contain the following sections:

  INSTRUCTIONS.  instructions to compile and run your code.  the
  instructions should not assume that an IDE is installed.  for
  compilation, supply a Makefile or a detailed sequence of commands, not an
  IDE's project file.  include a specific example of the command to run a
  selected testcase.

  MAIN FILES (phases 2-4 only).  The full pathname (in your zip or tar
  file) of the files containing the main code for the client, server, and
  master.  (This will help graders look at the most important/interesting 
  code first, and look at other code used by it as needed.)
  [UPDATE, 2014-09-16: I added this item.]

  BUGS AND LIMITATIONS.  a list of all known bugs in and limitations of
  your code.

  LANGUAGE COMPARISON (phase 3 only).  comparison of your experience
  implementing the algorithm in the two languages.

  CONTRIBUTIONS.  a list of contributions of each team member to the
  current submission.  this should reflect how the work was divided between
  the team members.  generally, a dozen lines or so is sufficient detail.

  OTHER COMMENTS.  anything else you want us to know.

testing.txt should contain an entry for each testcase you developed.  each
entry should include: (1) description of the tested scenario (including
when failures occur), and (if appropriate) the specific aspect of the
program targeted by this scenario, (2) the name of the configuration file
used to run this testcase, (3) other information (if any) needed to run the
testcase, the expected outcome (passed or failed, with a brief explanation
of the problem if it failed).  testcases should be cumulative; in other
words, later submissions should include the testcases from previous
submissions.  you should have numerous testcases, so testing.txt should be
organized into sections in some reasonable way, so testcases for similar
scenarios are in the same section.

============================================================
SCHEDULE: PROJECT AND HOMEWORK DUE DATES, EXAM DATES

sep  5 phase 0: team formation (2 weeks)
sep 19 phase 1: pseudo-code  (2 weeks)
oct 13 phase 2: non-fault-tolerant service (3 weeks
  [UPDATE 2014-09-29: changed phase 2 due date from oct 10 to oct 13]
oct 20 problem set 1
  [UPDATE 2014-10-16: changed problem set 1 due date from oct 17 to oct 20]
oct 24 midterm exam
nov 12 phase 3: fault-tol svc (4.3 wks after phase2 - 1.5 wks for hw1&exam = 2.8 wks)
  [UPDATE 2014-11-04: changed phase 3 due date from nov 7 to nov 12]
nov 24 phase 4: transfers (1.7 weeks)
  [UPDATE 2014-11-14: changed phase 4 due date from nov 21 to nov 24]
dec 5 problem set 2 last day of class
dec 17 8am-10:45am (incl 15min for exam admin) final exam

the time interval in parentheses is the amount of time allocated for work
on that phase of the project.

[UPDATE 2014-09-02: I added dates for homeworks and exams.  I changed phase 3
due date from oct 31 to nov 7, due to hw1 and the midterm. ]

============================================================
GRADING WEIGHTS (relative to the weight of the project in the course grade)

20% phase 1: pseudo-code
30% phase 2: non-fault-tolerant service
30% phase 3: fault-tolerant service
20% phase 4: transfers

============================================================
GRADING CRITERIA

several factors will be considered in grading, including:

functional correctness of code.

thorough testing.

code quality.  this encompasses all aspects of code quality other than
functional correctness, such as clarity, readability, maintainability,
extensibility, and efficiency.  one general measure of clarity is
similarity to high-level pseudo-code.  other factors include:

  Meaningful names for classes, methods, variables, etc.

  Consistent coding conventions

  Sufficient comments.

  Appropriate use of language features.  In DistAlgo, this includes use of
  DistAlgo-specific features and Python features, such as comprehensions.
  In general, it includes use of features such as inheritance, methods,
  generic types, comprehensions, enumeration types, for-each loops, and
  assertions.  For example, methods, inheritance, and loops should be used
  to avoid repeating blocks of identical or very similar code.  Low-level
  code should be encapsulated in methods.

  Modularity.  The code should be structured in a reasonable way into
  packages (if appropriate), classes and methods.  

there is sometimes a trade-off between clarity and efficiency.  the code
should not contain inefficiencies that can be eliminated without
appreciably complicating the code, but do not complicate the code to
achieve minor optimizations.  in many settings, including this class, code
clarity, readability, maintainability, etc., are more important.  if you
are uncertain whether you are striking the correct balance, you are welcome
to ask the instructor for guidance, preferably during office hours.

============================================================
DEMOS

demos will be held in the grad PC lab.  you may run the demo on one of the
lab PCs or your own laptop.

bring a printout of your README to the demo.  the TA will write notes on it
and keep it after the demo.

[UPDATE 2014-10-11: revised and extended the following.]

Demos proceed as follows:

1. Download your submission from Blackboard.

2. Delete files produced by the compiler (e.g., .class, .pyc).

3. Compile your code.

4. Demonstrate your system.  The TA will mainly watch while you give a
prepared demonstration.  It should consist of a concise sequence of
testcases that illustrates that all of the requirements are satisfied.  

You should have a detailed plan for which testcases to run.  You should be
prepared to indicate which testcase covers each requirement.  The TA will
keep track of this using the grading sheet, available under Documents on
Blackboard.  The TA may ask you to run additional testcases.

All expected activity must be shown clearly in readable and detailed logs,
otherwise points will be deducted for inadequate logs and for functionality
that cannot be adequately evaluated due to inadequate logs.  Only partial
credit will be given for functionality not demonstrated during the
allocated demo timeslot, so you must run and explain your testcases
efficiently.  All necessary configuration files should be created in
advance.

For convenience, each team's demos for phases 3 and 4 will be done in a
single demo session held after the phase 4 due date.  In other words, you
will download phase 3 from Blackboard, demo it, download phase 4, and demo
it.  This does not affect due dates or grading weights.  It just simplifies
logistics: you need to sign up for and show up for one longer demo session
instead of two shorter ones.

============================================================
DEMO SIGNUP    [UPDATE 2014-10-13: added this section]

each team should sign up for one demo timeslot with one TA.  if you are
friends with either TA, you must sign up for a demo with the other TA, to
avoid conflict of interest.  otherwise, you can sign up for a demo with
either TA, subject to the following condition: Ankit will hold exactly 16
demos, and Shachee will hold exactly 13 demos.  both TAs offered more
timeslots than the number of demos they will hold, to provide you with more
scheduling flexibility, so you must count the appointments to check whether
one TA has reached his or her demo limit, and if so, you must sign up for a
demo with the other TA.

timeslots are available this week and next week.  a later demo does not
give more time to work on the project, because you must download and run
the version you submitted on blackboard.

on the google calendar, an available timeslot is represented by an
off-white box labeled "phase 2" or "phase 2 demo".  a timeslot that you
booked is represented by a dark blue rectangle (the same size as the
off-white ones, corresponding to the demo duration of 45 minutes).  ignore
the tall blue rectangles, if any.  to book a timeslot, click on it, and
fill out the dialog box.  to cancel, delete the event from your own google
calendar.

make sure the time zone for your google calendar is "(GMT-05:00) Eastern
Time", as follows: navigate to your google calendar, click on the gear
icon, click on Settings, and check the setting for "Your current time
zone".

Ankit Arya:
https://www.google.com/calendar/selfsched?sstoken=UUZpLXhycHYxVjh6fGRlZmF1bHR8MTkzNDI1NTZjN2VlOWFlNmEwNjA2ZmFiZTIwODFlMzE

Shachee Mishra:
https://www.google.com/calendar/selfsched?sstoken=UUVRQWljMEpXUDdHfGRlZmF1bHR8MzdiMWVhMDExYTE4OWE3NzFlY2MyYTUyOTJhY2Q4Y2Y

============================================================
DISTALGO TIP: WAITING FOR TWO KINDS OF MESSAGES WITH DIFFERENT TIMEOUTS

suppose a client process needs to wait for responses (to requests) with
timeout T1, and needs to wait for failure notifications with no timeout.
here is the simplest way (I think) to achieve this in DistAlgo.  a single
thread suffices, because there is no timeout for failure notifications.

this sample code uses ideal DistAlgo sntax, not Python DistAlgo syntax.

  receive ('failureNotification', ...) from p: 
    <handle failure notification>

  receive ('response', reqID, result) from p: 
    <handle response>

  while ...:
    ...
    // wait for a response to the request with the specified reqID
    reqID = ...
    await some ('response', =reqID, result) in received : pass
    timeout T1: <handle missing response, e.g., resend the request>
    ...

note that this program uses an existential quantification over the received
sequence to check whether a response to request reqID has been received;
alternatively, the program could use its own data structures for this
purpose.  the equals sign in "=reqID" indicates that reqID is a parameter
of the comprehension; in Python DistAlgo syntax, use an underscore instead;
see Section 3 of the DistAlgo language reference for details.

the use of a receive handler for response messages is not essential.  the
receive handler can be incorporated in the await statement as follows:

  receive ('failureNotification', ...) from p: 
    <handle failure notification>

  while ...:
    ...
    // wait for a response to the request with the specified reqID
    reqID = ...
    await some ('response', =reqID, result) from p in received : <handle response>
    timeout T1: <handle missing response, e.g., resend the request>
    ...

recall from the Quantification section of the DistAlgo Language Description
that "When an existential quantification returns true, all variables in the
query are also bound to a combination of values, called a witness, that
satisfy all the membership clauses and condition bexp.."  thus, in the
above program, variables "result" and "p" are bound by the existential
quantification and can be used in the code for <handle response>, just as
they can be used in the receive handler in the original version of this
program.

more generally, suppose a process is waiting for two kinds of messages,
each with a different timeout period (not "no timeout").  in this case, the
simplest approach is to use two threads, each executing an await statement
with the appropriate timeout and with a condition that tests whether the
corresponding kind of message has been received.  it is possible but
cumbersome to avoid use of multiple threads; basically the program needs to
keep track of the next deadline for receiving either kind of message, and
execute an await statement with a timeout equal to that deadline.  this is
cumbersome because the next deadline depends not only on the timeout
periods for the two kinds of messages but also the actual arrival times of
previous messages.
